IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.1
Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
Introduction
This overview provides a basic and abbreviated discussion of
federal fair lending laws and regulations. It is adapted from
the Interagency Policy Statement on Fair Lending issued in
March 1994.
Lending Discrimination Statutes and Regulations
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) prohibits
discrimination in any aspect of a credit transaction. It
applies to any extension of credit, including extensions of
credit to small businesses, corporations, partnerships, and
trusts.
The ECOA prohibits discrimination based on:
• Race or color;
• Religion;
• National origin;
• Sex;
• Marital status;
• Age (provided the applicant has the capacity to contract);
• The applicant’s receipt of income derived from any
public assistance program; or
• The applicant’s exercise, in good faith, of any right
under the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s Regulation B,
found at 12 CFR part 1002, implements the ECOA.
Regulation B describes lending acts and practices that are
specifically prohibited, permitted, or required. Official staff
interpretations of the regulation are found in Supplement I to
12 CFR part 1002.
The Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act of 2010 further amended the ECOA and
covers:
• Data collection for loans to minority-owned and
women-owned businesses (awaiting final regulation);
• Legal action statute of limitations for ECOA
violations is extended to five years (effective July 21, 2010);
and
• A disclosure of the consumer’s ability to receive a
copy of any appraisal(s) and valuation(s) prepared in
connection with first-lien loans secured by a dwelling is to be
provided to applicants within 3 business days of receiving the
application (effective January 18, 2014).
NOTE: Further information regarding the technical
requirements of fair lending are incorporated into the
sections ECOA V 7.1 and FCRA VIII 6.1 of this manual.
The Fair Housing Act (FHAct) prohibits discrimination in all
aspects of “residential real-estate related transactions,”
including but not limited to:
• Making loans to buy, build, repair, or improve a
dwelling;
• Purchasing real estate loans;
• Selling, brokering, or appraising residential real estate; or
• Selling or renting a dwelling.
The FHAct prohibits discrimination based on:
• Race or color;
• National origin;
• Religion;
• Sex;
• Familial status (defined as children under the age of 18
living with a parent or legal custodian, pregnant women,
and people securing custody of children under 18); or
• Handicap.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development’s
(HUD) regulations implementing the FHAct are found at 24
CFR Part 100. Because both the FHAct and the ECOA
apply to mortgage lending, lenders may not discriminate in
mortgage lending based on any of the prohibited factors in
either list.
Under the ECOA, it is unlawful for a lender to discriminate
on a prohibited basis in any aspect of a credit transaction,
and under both the ECOA and the FHAct, it is unlawful for a
lender to discriminate on a prohibited basis in a residential
real-estate-related transaction. Under one or both of these
laws, a lender may not, because of a prohibited factor:
• Fail to provide information or services or provide
different information or services regarding any aspect of
the lending process, including credit availability,
application procedures, or lending standards.
• Discourage or selectively encourage applicants
with respect to inquiries about or applicationsfor
credit.
• Refuse to extend credit or use different standards
in determining whether to extend credit.
• Vary the terms of credit offered, including the
amount, interest rate, duration, or type of loan.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.2 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
• Use different standards to evaluate collateral.
• Treat a borrower differently in servicing a loan
or invoking default remedies.
• Use different standards for pooling or packaging a loan
in the secondary market.
A lender may not express, orally or in writing, a
preference based on prohibited factors or indicate that it
will treat applicants differently on a prohibited basis. A
violation may still exist even if a lender treated applicants
equally.
A lender may not discriminate on a prohibited basis because
of the characteristics of
• An applicant, prospective applicant, or borrower.
• A person associated with an applicant, prospective
applicant, or borrower (for example, a co-applicant,
spouse, business partner, or live-in aide).
• The present or prospective occupants of either the
property to be financed or the characteristics of the
neighborhood or other area where property to be financed
is located.
Finally, the FHAct requires lenders to make reasonable
accommodationsfor a person with disabilities when such
accommodations are necessary to afford the person an equal
opportunity to apply for credit.
Types of Lending Discrimination
The courts have recognized three methods of proof of lending
discrimination under the ECOA and the FHAct:
• Overt evidence of disparate treatment;
• Comparative evidence of disparate treatment; and
• Evidence of disparate impact.
Disparate Treatment
The existence of illegal disparate treatment may be established
either by statements revealing that a lender explicitly
considered prohibited factors (overt evidence) or by
differences in treatment that are not fully explained by
legitimate nondiscriminatory factors (comparative evidence).
Overt Evidence of Disparate Treatment. There is overt
evidence of discrimination when a lender openly discriminates
on a prohibited basis.
Example: A lender offered a credit card with a limit of up to
$750 for applicants aged 21-30 and $1500 for applicants over
30. This policy violated the ECOA’s prohibition on
discrimination based on age.
There is overt evidence of discrimination even when a lender
expresses — but does not act on — a discriminatory
preference:
Example: A lending officer told a customer, “We do not like
to make home mortgages to Native Americans, but the law
says we cannot discriminate and we have to comply with the
law.” This statement violated the FHAct’s prohibition on
statements expressing a discriminatory preference as well as
Section 1002.4(b) of Regulation B, which prohibits
discouraging applicants on a prohibited basis.
Comparative Evidence of Disparate Treatment. Disparate
treatment occurs when a lender treats a credit applicant
differently based on one of the prohibited bases. It does
not require any showing that the treatment was motivated
by prejudice or a conscious intention to discriminate
against a person beyond the difference in treatment itself.
Disparate treatment may more likely occur in the treatment of
applicants who are neither clearly well-qualified nor clearly
unqualified. Discrimination may more readily affect applicants
in this middle group for two reasons. First, if the applications
are “close cases,” there is more room and need for lender
discretion. Second, whether or not an applicant qualifies may
depend on the level of assistance the lender provides the
applicant in completing an application. The lender may, for
example, propose solutions to credit or other problems
regarding an application, identify compensating factors, and
provide encouragement to the applicant. Lenders are under no
obligation to provide such assistance, but to the extent that they
do, the assistance must be provided in a nondiscriminatory
way.
Example: A non-minority couple applied for an automobile
loan. The lender found adverse information in the couple’s
credit report. The lender discussed the credit report with
them and determined that the adverse information, a
judgment against the couple, was incorrect because the
judgment had been vacated. The non-minority couple was
granted their loan. A minority couple applied for a similar
loan with the same lender. Upon discovering adverse
information in the minority couple’s credit report, the lender
denied the loan application on the basis of the adverse
information without giving the couple an opportunity to
discuss the report.
The foregoing is an example of disparate treatment of
similarly situated applicants, apparently based on a
prohibited factor, in the amount of assistance and
information the lender provided.
If a lender has apparently treated similar applicants
differently on the basis of a prohibited factor, it must
provide an explanation for the difference in treatment. If the
lender’s explanation is found to be not credible, the agency
may find that the lender discriminated.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.3
Redlining is a form of illegal disparate treatment in which
a lender provides unequal access to credit, or unequal
terms of credit, because of the race, color, national origin,
or other prohibited characteristic(s) of the residents of the
area in which the credit seeker resides or will reside or in
which the residential property to be mortgaged is located.
Redlining may violate both the FHAct and the ECOA.
Disparate Impact
When a lender applies a racially or otherwise neutral policy
or practice equally to all credit applicants, but the policy or
practice disproportionately excludes or burdens certain
persons on a prohibited basis, the policy or practice is
described as having a “disparate impact.”
Example: A lender’s policy is not to extend loans for single
family residences for less than $60,000.00. This policy has
been in effect for ten years. This minimum loan amount
policy is shown to disproportionately exclude potential
minority applicants from consideration because of their
income levels or the value of the houses in the areas in
which they live.
The fact that a policy or practice creates a disparity on a
prohibited basis is not alone proof of a violation. When an
Agency finds that a lender’s policy or practice has a disparate
impact; the next step is to seek to determine whether the policy
or practice is justified by “business necessity.” The
justification must be manifest and may not be hypothetical or
speculative.
Factors that may be relevant to the justification could include
cost and profitability. Even if a policy or practice that has a
disparate impact on a prohibited basis can be justified by
business necessity, it still may be found to be in violation if an
alternative policy or practice could serve the same purpose
with less discriminatory effect. Finally, evidence of
discriminatory intent is not necessary to establish that a
lender’s adoption or implementation of a policy or practice that
has a disparate impact is in violation of the FHAct or ECOA.
These procedures do not call for examiners to plan
examinations to identify or focus on potential disparate impact
issues. The guidance in this Introduction is intended to help
examiners recognize fair lending issues that may have a
potential disparate impact. Guidance in the Appendix to the
Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures provides
details on how to obtain relevant information regarding such
situations along with methods of evaluation, as appropriate.
General Guidelines
These procedures are intended to be a basic and flexible
framework to be used in the majority of fair lending
examinations conducted by the FFIEC agencies. They are also
intended to guide examiner judgment, not to supplant it. The
procedures can be augmented by each agency as necessary to
ensure their effective implementation. While these procedures
apply to many examinations, agencies routinely use statistical
analyses or other specialized techniques in fair lending
examinations to assist in evaluating whether a prohibited basis
was a factor in an institution’s credit decisions. Examiners
should follow the procedures provided by their respective
agencies in these cases.
For a number of aspects of lending — for example, credit
scoring and loan pricing — the “state of the art” is more likely
to be advanced if the agencies have some latitude to
incorporate promising innovations. These interagency
procedures provide for that latitude.
Any references in these procedures to options, judgment, etc.,
of “examiners” means discretion within the limits provided by
that examiner’s agency. An examiner should use these
procedures in conjunction with his, or her, own agency’s
priorities, examination philosophy, and detailed guidance for
implementing these procedures. These procedures should not
be interpreted as providing the examiner greater latitude than
his, or her, own agency would. For example, if an agency’s
policy is to review compliance management systems in all of
its institutions, an examiner for that agency must conduct such
a review rather than interpret Part II of these interagency
procedures as leaving the review to the examiner’s option.
The procedures emphasize racial and national origin
discrimination in residential transactions, but the key
principles are applicable to other prohibited bases and
to nonresidential transactions.
Finally, these procedures focus on analyzing
institution compliance with the broad,
nondiscrimination requirements of the ECOA and the
FHAct. They do not address such explicit or
technical compliance provisions as the signature rules
or adverse action notice requirements in Sections
1002.7 and 1002.9, respectively, of Regulation B.
Part I — Examination Scope Guidelines Background
Consistent with the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council Interagency Fair Lending Examination
Procedures, FDIC examiners evaluate fair lending risk
during the scoping process by completing three general
steps:
1. Examiners develop an institutional overview to assess an
institution’s inherent fair lending risk. As part of this
process, examiners become familiar with an institution’s
structure and management, supervisory history, loan
portfolio, and credit and market operations. Once examiners
understand a financial institution’s lending operations they
can identify the level of inherent risk. Inherent risk for fair
lending is broad-based and would impact a range of products
if no controls or other mitigating factors were in place to
control the risk. Inherent risk arises from the general 
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.4 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
conditions or the environment in which the institution
operates. The risk could be present based on an institution’s
structure, supervisory history, the composition of the loan
portfolio, and the credit and market operations
2. If an examiner believes that an institution has more than
minimal inherent fair lending risk, the examiner should then
identify the product(s) or product group(s) to review. The
products or product groups selected may differ based on the
type of discrimination. For example, for purposes of pricing,
an examiner may select HMDA loans for further review,
while for underwriting, the examiner may select consumer
loans. Examiners are not expected to review all products for
discrimination risk if there is more than minimal inherent
risk. Rather, examiners should use their judgment and
consider the following when deciding which loan products
warrant further review. Examiners would then identify any
discrimination risk factors and assess an institution’s
compliance management system (CMS) for fair lending.
Understanding the strength of an institution’s CMS is
necessary to properly assess whether an institution has
sufficiently mitigated applicable discrimination risk factors.
If there is minimal inherent risk, no additional analysis is
necessary and the fair lending review can conclude.
3. For those discrimination risk factors that have not been
fully mitigated, examiners compile a list of potential focal
points and identify which should be pursued as a focal point.
The FDIC has developed the Fair Lending Scope and
Conclusions Memorandum (FLSC) to implement a standard
nationwide format for documenting the scope and
conclusions of fair lending reviews. FLSC has been adopted
as a means of focusing the examiner’s attention to the areas
that pose the greatest unmanaged fair lending risk to the
institution. It incorporates the Interagency Fair Lending
Examination Procedures1 and assists in documenting the
types of fair lending risks that are present; the controls that
management has put in place to manage the risk; the
effectiveness of these controls; why the particular focal
point(s) are chosen; the level of review conducted; and the
results of any additional analysis that was conducted. The
FLSC is included in section IV-3.1 of this manual.
The scope of an examination encompasses the loan
product(s), market(s), decision center(s), time frame, and
prohibited basis and control group(s) to be analyzed during
the examination. These procedures refer to each potential
combination of those elements as a “focal point.” Setting the
scope of an examination involves, first, identifying all of the
potential focal points that appear worthwhile to examine.
Then, from among those, examiners select the Focal
Point(s) that will form the scope of the examination, based
on risk factors, priorities established in these procedures or
 1 The interagency examination procedures are presented in their entirety in Part
III of this section of the manual.
by their respective agencies, the record from past
examinations, and other relevant guidance. This phase
includes obtaining an overview of an institution’s
compliance management system as it relates to fair lending.
When selecting focal points for review, examiners may
determine that the institution has performed “self-tests” or
“self-evaluations” related to specific lending products. The
difference between “self-tests” and “self-evaluations” is
discussed in the Using Self-Tests and Self-Evaluations to
Streamline the Examination section of the Appendix.
Institutions must share all information regarding “selfevaluations” and certain limited information related to “selftests.” Institutions may choose to voluntarily disclose
additional information about “self-tests.” Examiners should
make sure that institutions understand that voluntarily
sharing the results of self-tests will result in a loss of
confidential status of these tests. Information from “selfevaluations” or “self-tests” may allow the scoping to be
streamlined. Refer to Using Self-Tests and Self-Evaluations
to Streamline the Examination in the Appendix for
additional details.
Scoping may disclose the existence of circumstances —
such as the use of credit scoring or a large volume of
residential lending — which, under an agency’s policy, call
for the use of regression analysis or other statistical methods
of identifying potential discrimination with respect to one or
more loan products. Where that is the case, the agency’s
specialized procedures should be employed for such loan
products rather than the procedures set forth below.
Setting the intensity of an examination means determining the
breadth and depth of the analysis that will be conducted on the
selected loan product(s). This process entails a more involved
analysis of the institution’s compliance risk management
processes, particularly as it relates to selected products, to
reach an informed decision regarding how large a sample of
files to review in any transactional analyses performed and
whether certain aspects of the credit process deserve
heightened scrutiny.
Part I of these procedures provides guidance on establishing
the scope of the examination. Part II (Compliance
Management Review) provides guidance on determining the
intensity of the examination. There is naturally some
interdependence between these two phases. Ultimately the
scope and intensity of the examination will determine the
record of performance that serves as the foundation for
agency conclusions about institutional compliance with fair
lending obligations. The examiner should employ these
procedures to arrive at a well-reasoned and practical
conclusion about how to conduct a particular institution’s
examination of fair lending performance.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.5
In certain cases where an agency already possesses
information which provides examiners with guidance on
priorities and risks for planning an upcoming examination,
such information may expedite the scoping process and make
it unnecessary to carry out all of the steps below. For
example, the report of the previous fair lending examination
may have included recommendations for the focus of the next
examination. However, examiners should validate that the
institution’s operational structure, product offerings, policies,
and risks have not changed since the prior examination before
condensing the scoping process.
The scoping process can be performed either off-site, onsite, or
both, depending on whatever is determined appropriate and
feasible. In the interest of minimizing burdens on both the
examination team and the institution, requests for information
from the institution should be carefully thought out so as to
include only the information that will clearly be useful in the
examination process. Finally, any off-site information requests
should be made sufficiently in advance of the on-site schedule
to permit institutions adequate time to assemble necessary
information and provide it to the examination team in a timely
fashion. (See “Potential Scoping Information” in the
Appendix for guidance on additional information that the
examiner might wish to consider including in a request).
Examiners should focus the examination based on:
• An understanding of the credit operations
of the institution;
• The risk that discriminatory conduct may
occur in each area of those operations; and
• The feasibility of developing a factually
reliable record of an institution’s
performance and fair lending compliance in
each area of those operations.
Understanding Credit Operations
Before evaluating the potential for discriminatory conduct,
the examiner should review sufficient information about the
institution and its market to understand the credit operations
of the institution and the representation of prohibited basis
group residents within the markets where the institution does
business. The level of detail to be obtained at this stage
should be sufficient to identify whether any of the risk
factors in the steps below are present. Relevant background
information includes:
• The types and terms of credit products offered,
differentiating among broad categories of credit such as
residential, consumer, or commercial, as well as product
variations within such categories (fixed vs. variable, etc.).
• Whether the institution has a special purpose credit
program, or other program that is specifically designed to
assist certain underserved populations.
• The volume of, or growth in, lending for each of the
credit products offered.
• The demographics (i.e., race, national origin, etc.) of
the credit markets in which the institution is doing
business.
• The institution’s organization of its credit decisionmaking process, including identification of the
delegation of separate lending authorities and the extent
to which discretion in pricing or setting credit terms and
conditions is delegated to various levels of managers,
employees or independent brokers or dealers.
• The institution’s loan officer or broker
compensation program.
• The types of relevant documentation/data that are
available for various loan products and what is the
relative quantity, quality and accessibility of such
information (i.e., for which loan product(s) will the
information available be most likely to support a sound
and reliable fair lending analysis).
• The extent to which information requests can be
readily organized and coordinated with other
compliance examination components to reduce undue
burden on the institution. (Do not request more
information than the exam team can be expected to
utilize during the anticipated course of the
examination.)
In thinking about an institution’s credit markets, the
examiner should recognize that these markets may or may
not coincide with an institution’s Community Reinvestment
Act (CRA) assessment area(s). Where appropriate, the
examiner should review the demographics for a broader
geographic area than the assessment area.
Where an institution has multiple underwriting or loan
processing centers or subsidiaries, each with fully
independent credit-granting authority, consider evaluating
each center and/or subsidiary separately, provided a
sufficient number of loans exist to support a meaningful
analysis. In determining the scope of the examination for
such institutions, examiners should consider whether:
• Subsidiaries should be examined. The agencies will hold
a financial institution responsible for violations by its
direct subsidiaries, but not typically for those by its
affiliates (unless the affiliate has acted as the agent for the
institution or the violation by the affiliate was known or
should have been known to the institution before it
became involved in the transaction or purchased the
affiliate’s loans). When seeking to determine an
institution’s relationship with affiliates that are not
supervised financial institutions, limit the inquiry to what
can be learned in the institution and do not contact the 
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.6 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
affiliate without prior consultation with agency staff.
• The underwriting standards and procedures used in the
entity being reviewed are used in related entities not
scheduled for the planned examination. This will help
examiners to recognize the potential scope of policybased violations.
• The portfolio consists of applications from a purchased
institution. If so, for scoping purposes, examiners
should consider the applications as if they were made to
the purchasing institution. For comparison purposes,
applications evaluated under the purchased institution’s
standards should not be compared to applications
evaluated under the purchasing institution’s standards.
• The portfolio includes purchased loans. If so, examiners
should look for indications that the institution specified
loans to purchase based on a prohibited factor or caused a
prohibited factor to influence the origination process.
• A complete decision can be made at one of the several
underwriting or loan processing centers, each with
independent authority. In such a situation, it is best to
conduct on-site a separate comparative analysis at each
underwriting center. If covering multiple centers is not
feasible during the planned examination, examiners should
review their processes and internal controls to determine
whether or not expanding the scope and/or length of the
examination is justified.
• Decision-making responsibility for a single transaction
may involve more than one underwriting center. For
example, an institution may have authority to decline
mortgage applicants, but only the mortgage company
subsidiary may approve them. In such a situation,
examiners should learn which standards are applied in
each entity and the location of records needed for the
planned comparisons.
• Applicants can be steered from the financial institution to
the subsidiary or other lending channel and vice versa, and
what policies and procedures exist to monitor this practice.
• Any third parties, such as brokers or contractors, are
involved in the credit decision and how responsibility is
allocated among them and the institution. The
institution’s familiarity with third party actions may be
important, for an institution may be in violation if it
participates in transactions in which it knew or reasonably
ought to have known other parties were discriminating.
As part of understanding the financial institution’s own
lending operations, it is also important to understand any
dealings the financial institution has with affiliated and nonaffiliated mortgage loan brokers and other third party
lenders.
These brokers may generate mortgage applications and
originations solely for a specific financial institution or may
broadly gather loan applicationsfor a variety of local,
regional, or national lenders. As a result, it is important to
recognize what impact these mortgage brokers and other
third party lender actions and application processing
operations have on the lending operations of a financial
institution. Because brokers can be located anywhere in or
out of the financial institution’s primary lending or CRA
assessment areas, it is important to evaluate broker activity
and fair lending compliance related to underwriting, terms,
and conditions, redlining, and steering, each of which is
covered in more depth in sections of these procedures.
Examiners should consult with their respective agencies for
specific guidance regarding broker activity.
If the institution is large and geographically diverse,
examiners should select only as many markets or
underwriting centers as can be reviewed readily in depth,
rather than selecting proportionally to cover every market.
As needed, examiners should narrow the focus to the
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) or underwriting
center(s) that are determined to present the highest
discrimination risk. Examiners should use Loan Application
Register (LAR) data organized by underwriting center, if
available. After calculating denial rates between the control
and prohibited basis groups for the underwriting centers,
examiners should select the centers with the highest fair
lending risk. This approach would also be used when
reviewing pricing or other terms and conditions of approved
applicants from the prohibited basis and control groups. If
underwriting centers have fewer than five racial or national
origin denials, examiners should not examine for racial
discrimination in underwriting. Instead, they should shift the
focus to other loan products or prohibited bases, or
examination types such as a pricing examination.
However, if examiners learn of other indications of risks that
favor analyzing a prohibited basis with fewer transactions
than the minimum in the sample size tables, they should
consult with their supervisory office on possible alternative
methods of analysis. For example, there is strong reason to
examine a pattern in which almost all of 19 male borrowers
received low rates but almost all of four female borrowers
received high rates, even though the number of each group is
fewer than the stated minimum. Similarly, there would be
strong reason to examine a pattern in which almost all of 100
control group applicants were approved but all four
prohibited basis group applicants were not, even though the
number of prohibited basis denials was fewer than five.
Evaluating the Potential for Discriminatory Conduct
Step One: Develop an Overview
Based on his or her understanding of the credit operations and
product offerings of an institution, an examiner should
determine the nature and amount of information required for 
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.7
the scoping process and should obtain and organize that
information. No single examination can reasonably be
expected to evaluate compliance performance as to every
prohibited basis, in every product, or in every underwriting
center or subsidiary of an institution. In addition to
information gained in the process of Understanding Credit
Operations, above, the examiner should keep in mind the
following factors when selecting products for the scoping
review:
• Which products and prohibited bases were reviewed
during the most recent prior examination(s) and,
conversely, which products and prohibited bases have not
recently been reviewed?
• Which prohibited basis groups make up a significant
portion of the institution’s market for the different credit
products offered?
• Which products and prohibited basis groups the institution
reviewed using either a voluntarily disclosed self-test or a
self-evaluation?
Based on consideration of the foregoing factors, the examiner
should request information for all residential and other loan
products considered appropriate for scoping in the current
examination cycle. In addition, wherever feasible, examiners
should conduct preliminary interviews with the institution’s
key underwriting personnel and those involved with
establishing the institution’s pricing policies and practices.
Using the accumulated information, the examiner should
evaluate the following, as applicable:
• Underwriting guidelines, policies, and standards.
• Descriptions of credit scoring systems, including a list of
factors scored, cutoff scores, extent of validation, and any
guidance for handling overrides and exceptions. (Refer
to Part A of the “Considering Automated Underwriting
and Credit Scoring” section of the Appendix for
guidance.)
• Applicable pricing policies, risk-based pricing models,
and guidance for exercising discretion over loan terms
and conditions.
• Descriptions of any compensation system, including
whether compensation is related to, loan production or
pricing.
• The institution’s formal and informal relationships with
any finance companies, subprime mortgage or consumer
lending entities, or similar institutions.
• Loan application forms.
• Home Mortgage Disclosure Act – Loan Application
Register (HMDA-LAR) or loan registers and lists of
declined applications.
• Description(s) of databases maintained for loan product(s)
to be reviewed.
• Records detailing policy exceptions or overrides,
exception reporting and monitoring processes.
• Copies of any consumer complaints alleging
discrimination and related loan files.
• Compliance program materials (particularly fair lending
policies), training manuals, organization charts, as well as
record keeping, monitoring protocols, and internal
controls.
• Copies of any available marketing materials or
descriptions of current or previous marketing plans or
programs or pre-screened solicitations.
Step Two: Identify Compliance Program Discrimination
Risk Factors
Review information from agency examination work papers,
institutional records and any available discussions with
management representatives in sufficient detail to
understand the organization, staffing, training,
recordkeeping, auditing, policies and procedures of the
institution’s fair lending compliance systems. Review
these systems and note the following risk factors:
C1. Overall institution compliance record is weak.
C2. Prohibited basis monitoring information required by
applicable laws and regulations is nonexistent or
incomplete.
C3. Data and/or recordkeeping problems compromised
reliability of previous examination reviews.
C4. Fair lending problems were previously found in one or
more institution products or in institution subsidiaries.
C5. The size, scope, and quality of the compliance
management program, including management’s
involvement, designation of a compliance officer, and
staffing is materially inferior to programs customarily
found in institutions of similar size, market
demographics, and credit complexity.
C6. The institution has not updated compliance policies and
procedures to reflect changes in law or in agency
guidance.
C7. Fair lending training is nonexistent or weak.
Consider these risk factors and their impact on particular
lending products and practices as you conduct the product
specific risk review during the scoping steps that follow.
Where this review identifies fair lending compliance system
deficiencies, give them appropriate consideration as part of the
Compliance Management Review in Part II of these 
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.8 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
procedures.
Step Three: Review Residential Loan Products
Although home mortgages may not be the ultimate subject of
every fair lending examination, this product line must at least
be considered in the course of scoping every institution that is
engaged in the residential lending market.
Divide home mortgage loans into the following groupings:
home purchase, home improvement, and refinancings.
Subdivide those three groups further if an institution does a
significant number of any of the following types or forms of
residential lending, and consider them separately:
• Government-insured loans
• Mobile home or manufactured housing loans
• Wholesale, indirect, and brokered loans
• Portfolio lending (including portfolios of Fannie
Mae/Freddie Mac rejections)
In addition, determine whether the institution offers any
conventional “affordable” housing loan programs special
purpose credit programs or other programs that are
specifically designed to assist certain borrowers, such as
underserved populations and whether their terms and
conditions make them incompatible with regular conventional
loans for comparative purposes. If so, consider them
separately.
If previous examinations have demonstrated the following,
then an examiner may limit the focus of the current
examination to alternative underwriting or processing centers
or to other residential products that have received less scrutiny
in the past:
• A strong fair lending compliance program.
• No record of discriminatory transactions at particular
decision centers or in particular residential products.
• No indication of a significant change in personnel,
operations, or underwriting or pricing policies at those
centers or in those residential products.
• No unresolved fair lending complaints, administrative
proceedings, litigation, or similar factors.
• No discretion to set price or credit terms and conditions
in particular decision centers or for particular
residential products.
Step Four: Identify Residential Lending Discrimination Risk
Factors
Review the lending policies, marketing plans, underwriting,
appraisal and pricing guidelines, broker/agent agreements and
loan application forms for each residential loan product that
represents an appreciable volume of, or displays noticeable
growth in, the institution’s residential lending.
• Review also any available data regarding the geographic
distribution of the institution’s loan originations with respect
to the race and national origin percentages of the census tracts
within its assessment area or, if different, its residential loan
product lending area(s).
• Conduct interviews of loan officers and other employees or
agents in the residential lending process concerning adherence
to and understanding of the above policies and guidelines as
well as any relevant operating practices.
• In the course of conducting the foregoing inquiries, look for
the following risk factors (factors are numbered
alphanumerically to coincide with the type of factor, e.g., “O”
for “overt”; “P” for “pricing,” etc.).
NOTE: For risk factors below that are marked with an
asterisk (*), examiners need not attempt to calculate the
indicated ratios for racial or national origin characteristics
when the institution is not a HMDA reporter. However,
consideration should be given in such cases to whether or not
such calculations should be made based on gender or racialethnic surrogates.
Overt indicators of discrimination such as:
O1. Including explicit prohibited basis identifiers in the
institution’s written or oral policies and procedures
(underwriting criteria, pricing standards, etc.).
O2. Collecting information, conducting inquiries or imposing
conditions contrary to express requirements of Regulation
B.
O3. Including variables in a credit scoring system that
constitute a basis or factor prohibited by Regulation B or,
for residential loan scoring systems, the FHAct. (If a
credit scoring system scores age, refer to Part E of the
Considering Automated Underwriting and Credit Scoring
section of the Appendix.)
O4. Statements made by the institution’s officers, employees,
or agents which constitute an express or implicit
indication that one or more such persons have engaged or
do engage in discrimination on a prohibited basis in any
aspect of a credit transaction.
O5. Employee or institutional statements that evidence
attitudes based on prohibited basis prejudices or
stereotypes.
Indicators of potential disparate treatment in
Underwriting such as:
U1. *Substantial disparities among the approval/denial rates
for applicants by monitored prohibited basis
characteristic (especially within income categories).
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.9
U2. *Substantial disparities among the application processing
times for applicants by monitored prohibited basis
characteristic (especially within denial reason groups).
U3. *Substantially higher proportion of withdrawn/
incomplete applications from prohibited basis group
applicants than from other applicants.
U4. Vague or unduly subjective underwriting criteria.
U5. Lack of clear guidance on making exceptions to
underwriting criteria, including credit scoring overrides.
U6. Lack of clear loan file documentation regarding reasons
for any exceptions to standard underwriting criteria,
including credit scoring overrides.
U7. Relatively high percentages of either exceptions to
underwriting criteria or overrides of credit score cutoffs.
U8. Loan officer or broker compensation based on loan
volume (especially loans approved per period of time).
U9. Consumer complaints alleging discrimination in loan
processing or in approving/denying residential loans.
Indicators of potential disparate treatment in Pricing (interest
rates, fees, or points) such as:
P1. Financial incentives for loan officers or brokers to
charge higher prices (including interest rate, fees and
points). Special attention should be given to situations
where financial incentives are accompanied by broad
pricing discretion (as in P2), such as through the use of
overages or yield spread premiums.
P2. Presence of broad discretion in loan pricing (including
interest rate, fees and points), such as through overages,
underages or yield spread premiums. Such discretion
may be present even when institutions provide rate sheets
and fees schedules, if loan officers or brokers are
permitted to deviate from those rates and fees without
clear and objective criteria.
P3. Use of risk-based pricing that is not based on objective
criteria or applied consistently.
P4. *Substantial disparities among prices being quoted or
charged to applicants who differ as to their monitored
prohibited basis characteristics.
P5. Consumer complaints alleging discrimination in
residential loan pricing.
P6. *In mortgage pricing, disparities in the incidence or rate
spreads2 of higher-priced lending by prohibited basis
characteristics as reported in the HMDA data.
P7. *A loan program that contains only borrowers from a
 2 Regulation C, Section 203.4(a)(12)
prohibited basis group, or has significant differences in
the percentages of prohibited basis groups, especially in
the absence of a Special Purpose Credit Program under
ECOA.
Indicators of potential disparate treatment by Steering such
as:
S1. Lack of clear, objective and consistently implemented
standards for (i) referring applicants to subsidiaries,
affiliates, or lending channels within the institution (ii)
classifying applicants as “prime” or “sub-prime”
borrowers, or (iii) deciding what kinds of alternative
loan products should be offered or recommended to
applicants (product placement).
S2. Financial incentives for loan officers or brokers to place
applicants in nontraditional products (i.e., negative
amortization, “interest only”, “payment option”
adjustable rate mortgages) or higher cost products.
S3. For an institution that offers different products based on
credit risk levels, any significant differences in
percentages of prohibited basis groups in each of the
alternative loan product categories.
S4. *Significant differences in the percentage of prohibited
basis applicants in loan products or products with specific
features relative to control group applicants. Special
attention should be given to products and features that
have potentially negative consequences for applicants
(i.e., non-traditional mortgages, prepayment penalties,
lack of escrow requirements, or credit life insurance).
S5. *For an institution that has one or more sub-prime
mortgage subsidiaries or affiliates, any significant
differences, by loan product, in the percentage of
prohibited basis applicants of the institution compared to
the percentage of prohibited basis applicants of the
subsidiary(ies) or affiliate(s).
S6. *For an institution that has one or more lending channels
that originate the same loan product, any significant
differences in the percentage of prohibited basis
applicants in one of the lending channels compared to the
percentage of prohibited basis applicants of the other
lending channel.
S7. Consumer complaints alleging discrimination in
residential loan pricing or product placement.
S8. *For an institution with sub-prime mortgage subsidiaries,
a concentration of those subsidiaries’ branches in
minority areas relative to its other branches.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.10 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
Indicators of potential discriminatory Redlining such as:
R1. *Significant differences, as revealed in HMDA data, in
the number of applications received, withdrawn,
approved not accepted, and closed for incompleteness or
loans originated in those areas in the institution’s market
that have relatively high concentrations of minority group
residents compared with areas with relatively low
concentrations of minority residents.
R2. *Significant differences between approval/denial rates for
all applicants (minority and non-minority) in areas with
relatively high concentrations of minority group residents
compared with areas with relatively low concentrations of
minority residents.
R3. *Significant differences between denial rates based on
insufficient collateral for applicants from areas with
relatively high concentrations of minority residents and
those areas with relatively low concentrations of minority
residents.
R4. *Significant differences in the number of originations of
higher-priced loans or loans with potentially negative
consequences for borrowers, (i.e., non-traditional
mortgages, prepayment penalties, lack of escrow
requirements) in areas with relatively high concentrations
of minority residents compared with areas with relatively
low concentrations of minority residents.
R5. Other patterns of lending identified during the most
recent CRA examination that differ by the concentration
of minority residents.
R6. Explicit demarcation of credit product markets that
excludes MSAs, political subdivisions, census tracts, or
other geographic areas within the institution’s lending
market or CRA assessment areas and having relatively
high concentrations of minority residents.
R7. Difference in services available or hours of operation at
branch offices located in areas with concentrations of
minority residents when compared to branch offices
located in areas with concentrations of non-minority
residents.
R8. Policies on receipt and processing of applications,
pricing, conditions, or appraisals and valuation, or on any
other aspect of providing residential credit that vary
between areas with relatively high concentrations of
minority residents and those areas with relatively low
concentrations of minority residents.
R9. The institution’s CRA assessment area appears to have
been drawn to exclude areas with relatively high
concentrations of minority residents.
R10.Employee statements that reflect an aversion to doing
business in areas with relatively high concentrations of
minority residents.
R11. Complaints or other allegations by consumers or
community representatives that the institution excludes or
restricts access to credit for areas with relatively high
concentrations of minority residents. Examiners should
review complaints against the institution filed either with
their agency or the institution; the CRA public comment
file; community contact forms; and the responses to
questions about redlining, discrimination, and
discouragement of applications, and about meeting the
needs of racial or national origin minorities, asked as part
of obtaining local perspectives on the performance of
financial institutions during prior CRA examinations.
R12. An institution that has most of its branches in
predominantly non-minority neighborhoods at the same
time that the institution’s sub-prime mortgage subsidiary
has branches which are located primarily in
predominantly minority neighborhoods.
Indicators of potential disparate treatment in Marketing of
residential products, such as:
M1. Advertising patterns or practices that a reasonable
person would believe indicate prohibited basis
customers are less desirable.
M2. Advertising only in media serving non-minority areas of
the market.
M3. Marketing through brokers or other agents that the
institution knows (or has reason to know) would serve
only one racial or ethnic group in the market.
M4. Use of marketing programs or procedures for residential
loan products that exclude one or more regions or
geographies within the institutions assessment or
marketing area that have significantly higher
percentages of minority group residents than does the
remainder of the assessment or marketing area.
M5. Using mailing or other distribution lists or other
marketing techniques for pre-screened or other offerings
of residential loan products that:
• Explicitly exclude groups of prospective borrowers on
a prohibited basis; or
• Exclude geographies (e.g., census tracts, ZIP codes,
etc.) within the institution’s marketing area that have
significantly higher percentages of minority group
residents than does the remainder of the marketing area.
M6. *Proportion of prohibited basis applicants is
significantly lower than that group’s representation in
the total population of the market area.
M7. Consumer complaints alleging discrimination in
advertising or marketing loans.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.11
Step Five: Organize and Focus Residential Risk Analysis
Review the risk factors identified in Step 4 and, for each loan
product that displays risk factors, articulate the possible
discriminatory effects encountered and organize the
examination of those loan products in accordance with the
following guidance. For complex issues regarding these
factors, consult with agency supervisory staff.
• Where overt evidence of discrimination, as described in
factors O1-O5, has been found in connection with a
product, document those findings as described in Part III,
B, besides completing the remainder of the planned
examination analysis.
• Where any of the risk factors U1-U9 are present,
consider conducting an underwriting comparative file
analysis as described in Part III, C.
• Where any of the risk factors P1-P7 are present,
consider conducting a pricing comparative file analysis
as described in Part III, D.
• Where any of the risk factors S1-S8 are present,
consider conducting a steering analysis as described in
Part III, E.
• Where any of the risk factors R1-R12 are present,
consider conducting an analysis for redlining as described
in Part III, G.
• Where any of the risk factors M1-M7 are present,
consider conducting a marketing analysis as described in
Part III, H.
• Where an institution uses age in any credit scoring system,
consider conducting an examination analysis of that credit
scoring system’s compliance with the requirements of
Regulation B as described in Part III, I.
Step Six: Identify Consumer Lending Discrimination Risk
Factors
For any consumer loan products selected in Step One for risk
analysis, examiners should conduct a risk factor review similar
to that conducted for residential lending products in Steps
Three through Five, above. Examiners should consult with
agency supervisory staff regarding the potential use of
surrogates to identify possible prohibited basis group
individuals.
NOTE: The term surrogate in this context refers to any factor
related to a loan applicant that potentially identifies that
applicant’s race, color, or other prohibited basis
characteristic in instances where no direct evidence of that
characteristic is available. Thus, in consumer lending, where
monitoring data is generally unavailable, a Hispanic or Asian
surname could constitute a surrogate for an applicant’s race
or national origin because the examiner can assume that the
institution (which can rebut the presumption) perceived the
person to be Hispanic or Asian. Similarly, an applicant’s
given name could serve as a surrogate for his or her gender.
A surrogate for a prohibited basis group characteristic may be
used to set up a comparative analysis with control group
applicants or borrowers.
Examiners should then follow the rules in Steps Three
through Five, above and identify the possible discriminatory
patterns encountered and consider examining those products
determined to have sufficient risk of discriminatory conduct.
Step Seven: Identify Commercial Lending Discrimination
Risk Factors
Where an institution does a substantial amount of lending in
the commercial lending market, most notably small business
lending and the product has not recently been examined or
the underwriting standards have changed since the last
examination of the product, the examiner should consider
conducting a risk factor review similar to that performed for
residential lending products, as feasible, given the limited
information available. Such an analysis should generally be
limited to determining risk potential based on risk factors
U4- U8; P1-P3; R5-R7; and M1-M3.
If the institution makes commercial loans insured by the
Small Business Administration (SBA), determine from
agency supervisory staff whether SBA loan data (which
codes race and other factors) are available for the institution
and evaluate those data pursuant to instructions
accompanying them.
For large institutions reporting small business loans for
CRA purposes and where the institution also voluntarily
geocodes loan denials, look for material discrepancies in
ratios of approval-to-denial rates for applications in areas
with high concentrations of minority residents compared to
areas with concentrations of non-minority residents.
Articulate the possible discriminatory patterns identified
and consider further examining those products determined
to have sufficient risk of discriminatory conduct in
accordance with the procedures for commercial lending
described in Part III, F.
Step Eight: Complete the Scoping Process
To complete the scoping process, the examiner should
review the results of the preceding steps and select those
focal points that warrant examination, based on the relative
risk levels identified above. In order to remain within the
agency’s resource allowances, the examiner may need to
choose a smaller number of focal points from among all
those selected on the basis of risk. In such instances, set the
scope by first, prioritizing focal points on the basis of (i)
high number and/or relative severity of risk factors; (ii) high
data quality and other factors affecting the likelihood of
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.12 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
obtaining reliable examination results; (iii) high loan volume
and the likelihood of widespread risk to applicants and
borrowers; and (iv) low quality of any compliance program
and, second, selecting for examination review as many focal
points as resources permit.
Where the judgment process among competing focal points is
a close call, information learned in the phase of conducting the
compliance management review can be used to further refine
the examiner’s choices.
Part II — Compliance Management Review
The Compliance Management Review enables the
examination team to determine:
• The intensity of the current examination based on an
evaluation of the compliance management measures
employed by an institution.
• The reliability of the institution’s practices and procedures
for ensuring continued fair lending compliance.
Generally, the review should focus on:
• Determining whether the policies and procedures of the
institution enable management to prevent, or to identify
and self-correct, illegal disparate treatment in the
transactions that relate to the products and issues
identified for further analysis under Part I of these
procedures.
• Obtaining a thorough understanding of the manner by
which management addresses its fair lending
responsibilities with respect to (a) the institution’s lending
practices and standards, (b) training and other applicationprocessing aids, (c) guidance to employees or agents in
dealing with customers, and (d) its marketing or other
promotion of products and services.
To conduct this review, examiners should consider institutional
records and interviews with appropriate management personnel
in the lending, compliance, audit, and legal functions. The
examiner should also refer to the Compliance Management
Analysis Checklist contained in the Appendix to evaluate the
strength of the compliance programs in terms of their capacity
to prevent, or to identify and self- correct, fair lending
violations in connection with the products or issues selected for
analysis. Based on this evaluation:
• Set the intensity of the transaction analysis by minimizing
sample sizes within the guidelines established in Part III
and the Fair Lending Sample Size Tables in the
Appendix, to the extent warranted by the strength and
thoroughness of the compliance programs applicable to
those focal points selected for examination.
 3 This reflects the interagency examination procedures in their entirety.
• Identify any compliance program or system deficiencies
that merit correction or improvement and present these to
management in accordance with Part IV of these
procedures.
Where an institution performs a self-evaluation or has
voluntarily disclosed the report or results of a self-test of
any product or issue that is within the scope of the
examination and has been selected for analysis pursuant to
Part I of these procedures, examiners may streamline the
examination, consistent with agency guidance, provided
the self-test or self-evaluation meets the requirements set
forth in Using Self-Tests and Self-Evaluations to
Streamline the Examination located in the Appendix.
Part III — Examination Procedures3
Once the scope and intensity of the examination have been
determined, assess the institution’s fair lending
performance by applying the appropriate procedures that
follow to each of the examination focal points already
selected.
A. Verify Accuracy of Data
Prior to any analysis and preferably before the scoping
process, examiners should assess the accuracy of the data
being reviewed. Data verifications should follow specific
protocols (sampling, size, etc.) intended to ensure the
validity of the review. For example, where an institution’s
LAR data is relied upon, examiners should generally
validate the accuracy of the institution’s submitted data by
selecting a sample of LAR entries and verifying that the
information noted on the LAR was reported according to
instructions by comparing information contained in the loan
file for each sampled loan. If the LAR data are inconsistent
with the information contained in the loan files, depending
on the nature of the errors, examiners may not be able to
proceed with a fair lending analysis until the LAR data
have been corrected by the institution. In cases where
inaccuracies impede the examination, examiners should
direct the institution to take action to ensure data integrity
(data scrubbing, monitoring, training, etc.).
NOTE: While the procedures refer to the use of HMDA data,
other data sources should be considered, especially in the
case of non-HMDA reporters or institutions that originate
loans but are not required to report them on a LAR.
B. Documenting Overt Evidence of Disparate Treatment
Where the scoping process or any other source identifies
overt evidence of disparate treatment, the examiner should
assess the nature of the policy or statement and the extent of
its impact on affected applicants by conducting the
following analysis.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.13
Step 1. Where the indicator(s) of overt discrimination are
found in or based on a written policy (for example, a credit
scorecard) or communication, determine and document:
a. The precise language of the apparently discriminatory
policy or communication and the nature of the fair
lending concerns that it raises.
b. The institution’s stated purpose in adopting the policy
or communication and the identity of the person on
whose authority it was issued or adopted.
c. How and when the policy or communication was put
into effect.
d. How widely the policy or communication was applied.
e. Whether and to what extent applicants were adversely
affected by the policy or communication.
Step 2. Where any indicator of overt discrimination was an
oral statement or unwritten practice, determine and
document:
a. The precise nature of both the statement, or practice, and
of the fair lending concerns that they raise.
b. The identity of the persons making the statement or
applying the practice and their descriptions of the
reasons for it and the persons authorizing or directing the
use of the statement or practice.
c. How and when the statement or practice was
disseminated or put into effect.
d. How widely the statement or practice was disseminated
or applied.
e. Whether and to what extent applicants were
adversely affected by the statement or practice.
Assemble findings and supporting documentation for
presentation to management in connection with Part IV of
these procedures.
C. Transactional Underwriting Analysis — Residential and
Consumer Loans.
Step 1. Set Sample Size
a. For each focal point selected for this analysis, two
samples will be utilized: (i) prohibited basis group denials
and (ii) control group approvals, both identified either
directly from monitoring information in the case of
residential loan applications or through the use of
application data or surrogates in the case of consumer
applications.
b. Refer to Fair Lending Sample Size Tables, Table A in the
Appendix and determine the size of the initial sample for
each focal point, based on the number of prohibited basis
group denials and the number of control group approvals
by the institution during the twelve month (or calendar
year) period of lending activity preceding the
examination.
In the event that the number of denials and/or approvals
acted on during the preceding 12 month period
substantially exceeds the maximum sample size shown
in Table A, reduce the time period from which that
sample is selected to a shorter period. (In doing so,
make every effort to select a period in which the
institution’s underwriting standards are most
representative of those in effect during the full 12
month period preceding the examination.)
c. If the number of prohibited basis group denials or
control group approvals for a given focal point that were
acted upon during the 12 month period referenced in
1.b., above, do not meet the minimum standards set forth
in the Sample Size Table, examiners need not attempt a
transactional analysis for that focal point. Where other
risk factors favor analyzing such a focal point, consult
with agency supervisory staff on possible alternative
methods of judgmental comparative analysis.
d. If agency policy calls for a different approach to
sampling (e.g., a form of statistical analysis, a
mathematical formula, or an automated tool) for a
limited class of institutions, examiners should follow
that approach.
Step 2. Determine Sample Composition
a. To the extent the institution maintains records of loan
outcomes resulting from exceptions to its credit
underwriting standards or other policies (e.g., overrides
to credit score cutoffs), request such records for both
approvals and denials, sorted by loan product and
branch or decision center, if the institution can do so.
Include in the initial sample for each focal point all
exceptions or overrides applicable to that focal point.
b. Using HMDA/LAR data or, for consumer loans,
comparable loan register data to the extent
available, choose approved and denied
applications based on selection criteria that will
maximize the likelihood of finding marginal
approved and denied applicants, as discussed
below.
c. To the extent that the above factors are inapplicable or
other selection criteria are unavailable or do not
facilitate selection of the entire sample size of files,
complete the initial sample selection by making random
file selections from the appropriate sample categories in
the Sample Size Table.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.14 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
Step 3. Compare Approved and Denied Applications
Overview: Although a creditor’s written policies and
procedures may appear to be nondiscriminatory, lending
personnel may interpret or apply policies in a
discriminatory manner. In order to detect any disparate
treatment among applicants, the examiner should first
eliminate all but “marginal transactions” (see 3.b. below)
from each selected focal point sample. Then, a detailed
profile of each marginal applicant’s qualifications, the
level of assistance received during the application process,
the reasons for denial, the loan terms, and other
information should be recorded on an Applicant Profile
Spreadsheet. Once profiled, the examiner can compare the
target and control groups for evidence that similarly
qualified applicants have been treated differently as to
either the institution’s credit decision or the quality of
assistance provided.
a. Create Applicant Profile Spreadsheet
Based upon the institution’s written and/or articulated
credit standards and loan policies, identify categories of
data that should be recorded for each applicant and
provide a field for each of these categories on a
worksheet or computerized spreadsheet. Certain data
(income, loan amount, debt, etc.) should always be
included in the spreadsheet, while the other data
selected will be tailored for each loan product and
institution based on applicable underwriting criteria
and such issues as branch location and underwriter.
Where credit bureau scores and/or application scores
are an element of the institution’s underwriting criteria
(or where such information is regularly recorded in
loan files, whether expressly used or not), include a
data field for this information in the spread sheet.
In order to facilitate comparisons of the quality of
assistance provided to target and control group applicants,
respectively, every work sheet should provide a
“comments” block appropriately labeled as the site for
recording observations from the file or interviews
regarding how an applicant was, or was not, assisted in
overcoming credit deficiencies or otherwise qualifying for
approval.
b. Complete Applicant Profiles
From the application files sample for each focal point,
complete applicant profiles for selected denied and
approved applications as follows:
• A principal goal is to identify cases where similarly
qualified prohibited basis and control group
applicants had different credit outcomes, because the
agencies have found that discrimination, including
differences in granting assistance during the approval
process, is more likely to occur with respect to
applicants who are not either clearly qualified or
unqualified ( i.e., “marginal” applicants). The
examiner-in-charge should, during the following
steps, judgmentally select from the initial sample
only those denied and approved applications which
constitute marginal transactions. (See Appendix on
Identifying Marginal Transactions for guidance)
• If few marginal control group applicants are identified
from the initial sample, review additional files of
approved control group applicants. This will either
increase the number of marginal approvals or confirm that
marginal approvals are so infrequent that the marginal
denials are unlikely to involve disparate treatment.
• The judgmental selection of both marginal-denied and
marginal-approved applicant loan files should be done
together, in a “back and forth” manner, to facilitate
close matches and a more consistent definition of
“marginal” between these two types of loan files.
• Once the marginal files have been identified, the data
elements called for on the profile spreadsheet are
extracted or noted and entered.
• While conducting the preceding step, the examiner
should simultaneously look for and document on the
spreadsheet any evidence found in marginal files
regarding the following:
° the extent of any assistance, including both
affirmative aid and waivers or partial waivers of
credit policy provisions or requirements, that
appears to have been provided to marginalapproved control group applicants which enabled
them to overcome one or more credit deficiencies,
such as excessive debt-to-income ratios; and
° the extent to which marginal-denied target group
applicants with similar deficiencies were, or were
not, provided similar affirmative aid, waivers or
other forms of assistance.
c. Review and Compare Profiles
• For each focal point, review all marginal profiles to determine
if the underwriter followed institution lending policies in
denying applications and whether the reason(s) for denial were
supported by facts documented in the loan file and properly
disclosed to the applicant pursuant to Regulation B. If any (a)
unexplained deviations from credit standards, (b) inaccurate
reasons for denial or (c) incorrect disclosures are noted,
(whether in a judgmental underwriting system, a scored
system or a mixed system) the examiner should obtain an
explanation from the underwriter and document the response
on an appropriate workpaper.
NOTE: In constructing the applicant profiles to be
compared, examiners must adjust the facts compared so that
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.15
assistance, waivers, or acts of discretion are treated
consistently between applicants. For example, if a control
group applicant’s DTI ratio was lowered to 42% because
the institution decided to include short-term overtime
income and a prohibited basis group applicant who was
denied due to “insufficient income” would have had his
ratio drop from 46% to 41% if his short-term overtime
income had been considered, then the examiners should
consider 41%, not 46%, in determining the benchmark.
• For each reason for denial identified within the target
group, rank the denied prohibited basis applicants,
beginning with the applicant whose qualification(s)
related to that reason for denial were least deficient.
(The top-ranked denied applicant in each such ranking
will be referred to below as the “benchmark”
applicant.)
• Compare each marginal control group approval to the
benchmark applicant in each reason-for-denial ranking
developed in step (b), above. If there are no approvals
who are equally or less qualified, then there are no
instances of disparate treatment for the institution to
account for. For all such approvals that appear no better
qualified than the denied benchmark applicant
o identify the approved loan on the worksheet or
spreadsheet as an “overlap approval,” and
o compare that overlap approval with other
marginal prohibited basis denials in the ranking to
determine whether additional overlaps exist. If
so, identify all overlapping approvals and denials
as above.
• Where the focal point involves use of a credit scoring
system, the analysis for disparate treatment is similar to
the procedures set forth in (c) above, and should focus
primarily on overrides of the scoring system itself. For
guidance on this type of analysis, refer to Considering
Automated Underwriting and Credit Scoring, Part C in
the Appendix.
Step 4. If there is some evidence of violations in the
underwriting process but not enough to clearly establish the
existence of a pattern or practice, the examiner should
expand the sample as necessary to determine whether a
pattern or practice does or does not exist.
Step 5. Discuss all findings resulting from the above
comparisons with management and document both the
findings and all conversations on an appropriate worksheet.
D. Analyzing Potential Disparities in Pricing and Other
Terms and Conditions.
Depending on the intensity of the examination and the size of
the borrower population to be reviewed, the analysis of
decisions on pricing and other terms and conditions may
involve a comparative file review, statistical analysis, a
combination of the two, or other specialized technique used by
an agency. Each examination process assesses an institution’s
credit-decision standards and whether decisions on pricing and
other terms and conditions are applied to borrowers without
regard to a prohibited basis.
The procedures below encompass the examination steps for a
comparative file review. Examiners should consult their own
agency’s procedures for detailed guidance where appropriate.
For example, when file reviews are undertaken in conjunction
with statistical analysis, the guidance on specific sample sizes
referenced below may not apply.
Step 1. Determine Sample Selection
Examiners may review data in its entirety or restrict their
analysis to a sample depending on the examination
approach used and the quality of the institution’s
compliance management system. The Fair Lending Sample
Size Tables in the Appendix provide general guidance about
appropriate sample sizes. Generally, the sample size should
be based on the number of prohibited basis group and
control group originations for each focal point selected
during the 12 months preceding the examination and the
outcome of the compliance management system analysis
conducted in Part II. When possible, examiners should
request specific loan files in advance and request that the
institution have them available for review at the start of the
examination.
Step 2. Determine Sample Composition and Create
Applicant Profiles
Examiners should tailor their sample and subsequent
analysis to the specific factors that the institution considers
when determining its pricing, terms, and conditions. For
example, while decisions on pricing, and other terms and
conditions are part of an institution’s underwriting process,
general underwriting criteria should not be used in the
analysis if they are not relevant to the term or condition to
be reviewed. Additionally, consideration should be limited
to factors which examiners determine to be legitimate.
While the period for review should be 12-months, prohibited
basis group and control group borrowers should be grouped
and reviewed around a range of dates during which the
institution’s practices for the term or condition being
reviewed were the same. Generally, examiners should use
the loan origination date or the loan application date.
Identify data to be analyzed for each focal point to be
reviewed and record this information for each borrower on
a spreadsheet to ensure a valid comparison regarding terms
and conditions. For example, in certain cases, an institution
may offer slightly differentiated products with significant
pricing implications to borrowers. In these cases, it may be 
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.16 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
appropriate to group these procedures together for the
purposes of evaluation.
Step 3. Review Terms and Conditions; Compare with
Borrower Outcomes
a. Review all loan terms and conditions (rates, points,
fees, maturity variations, LTVs, collateral
requirements, etc.) with special attention to those
which are left, in whole or in part, to the discretion of
loan officers or underwriters. For each such term or
condition, identify (a) any prohibited basis group
borrowers in the sample who appear to have been
treated unfavorably with respect to that term or
condition and (b) any control group borrowers who
appear to have been treated favorably with respect to
that term or condition. The examiner’s analysis should
be thoroughly documented in the workpapers.
b. Identify from the sample universe any control group
borrowers who appear to have been treated more
favorably than one or more of the above-identified
prohibited basis group borrowers and who have
pricing or creditworthiness factors (under the
institution’s standards) that are equal to or less
favorable than the prohibited basis group borrowers.
c. Obtain explanations from the appropriate loan officer or
other employee for any differences that exist and
reanalyze the sample for evidence of discrimination.
d. If there is some evidence of violations in the imposition of
terms and conditions but not enough to clearly establish
the existence of a pattern or practice, the examiner should
expand the sample as necessary to determine whether a
pattern or practice does or does not exist.
e. Discuss differences in comparable loans with the
institution’s management and document all conversations
on an appropriate worksheet. For additional guidance on
evaluating management’s responses, refer to Part A, 1 – 5,
Evaluating Responses to Evidence of Disparate Treatment
in the Appendix.
E. Steering Analysis
An institution that offers a variety of lending products or
product features, either through one channel or through
multiple channels, may benefit consumers by offering greater
choices and meeting the diverse needs of applicants. Greater
product offerings and multiple channels, however, may also
create a fair lending risk that applicants will be illegally
steered to certain choices based on prohibited characteristics.
Several examples illustrate potential fair lending risk:
• An institution that offers different lending products based
on credit risk levels may present opportunities for loan
officers or brokers to illegally steer applicants to the
higher-risk products.
• An institution that offers nontraditional loan products or
loan products with potentially onerous terms (such as
prepayment penalties) may present opportunities for loan
officers or brokers to illegally steer applicants to certain
products or features.
• An institution that offers prime or sub-prime products
through different channels may present opportunities for
applicants to be illegally steered to the sub-prime
channel.
The distinction between guiding consumers toward a specific
product or feature and illegal steering centers on whether the
institution did so on a prohibited basis, rather than based on
an applicant’s needs or other legitimate factors. It is not
necessary to demonstrate financial harm to a group that has
been “steered.” It is enough to demonstrate that action was
taken on a prohibited basis regardless of the ultimate
financial outcome. If the scoping analysis reveals the
presence of one or more risk factors S1 through S8 for any
selected focal point, consult with agency supervisory staff
about conducting a steering analysis as described below.
Step 1. Clarify what options are available to applicants
Through interviews with appropriate personnel of the
institution and review of policy manuals, procedure
guidelines and other directives, obtain and verify the
following information for each product-alternative product
pairing or grouping identified above:
a. All underwriting criteria for the product or feature and
their alternatives that are offered by the institution or by
a subsidiary or affiliate. Examples of products may
include stated income, negative amortization, and
options ARMs. Examples of terms and features include
prepayment penalties and escrow requirements. The
distinction between a product, term, and feature may
vary institution to institution. For example, some
institutions may consider “stated income” a feature,
whiles others may consider that a distinct product.
b. Pricing or other costs applicable to the product and the
alternative product(s), including interest rates, points,
and all fees.
Step 2. Document the policies, conditions, or criteria that
have been adopted by the institution for determining how
referrals are to be made and choices presented to applicants.
a. Obtain not only information regarding the product or
feature offered by the institution and alternatives
offered by subsidiaries/affiliates, but also information
on alternatives offered solely by the institution itself.
b. Obtain any information regarding a subsidiary of the
institution directly from that entity, but seek
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.17
information regarding an affiliate or holding company
subsidiary only from the institution itself.
c. Obtain all appropriate documentation and provide a
written summary of all discussions with loan
personnel and managers.
d. Obtain documentation and/or employee estimates as to
the volume of referrals made from or to the institution,
for each product, during a relevant time period.
e. Resolve to the extent possible any discrepancies
between information found in the institution’s
documents and information obtained in discussions
with loan personnel and managers by conducting
appropriate follow-up interviews.
f. Identify any policies and procedures established by the
institution and/or the subsidiary or affiliate for (i)
referring a person who applies to the institution, but
does not meet its criteria, to another internal lending
channel, subsidiary or affiliate; (ii) offering one or
more alternatives to a person who applies to the
institution for a specific product or feature, but does
not meet its criteria; or (iii) referring a person who
applies to a subsidiary or affiliate for its product, but
who appears qualified for a loan from the institution, to
the institution; or referring a person who applies
through one internal lending channel for a product, but
who appears to be qualified for a loan through another
lending channel to that particular lending channel.
g. Determine whether loan personnel are encouraged,
through financial incentives or otherwise, to make
referrals, either from the institution to a
subsidiary/affiliate or vice versa. Similarly,
determine whether the institution provides
financial incentives related to products and
features.
Step 3. Determine how referral decisions are made and
documented within the institution.
Determine how a referral is made to another internal lending
channel, subsidiary, or affiliate. Determine the reason for
referral and how it is documented.
Step 4. Determine to what extent individual loan personnel
are able to exercise personal discretion in deciding what loan
products or other credit alternatives will be made available to
a given applicant.
Step 5. Determine whether the institution’s stated policies,
conditions, or criteria in fact are adhered to by individual
decision makers. If not, does it appear that different policies
or practices are actually in effect?
Enter data from the prohibited basis group sample on the
spread sheets and determine whether the institution is, in fact,
applying its criteria as stated. For example, if one announced
criterion for receiving a “more favorable” prime mortgage
loan was a back end debt ratio of no more than 38%, review
the spread sheets to determine whether that criteria was
adhered to. If the institution’s actual treatment of prohibited
basis group applicants appears to differ from its stated
criteria, document such differences for subsequent discussion
with management.
Step 6. To the extent that individual loan personnel have any
discretion in deciding what products and features to offer
applicants, conduct a comparative analysis to determine
whether that discretion has been exercised in a
nondiscriminatory manner.
Compare the institution’s or subsidiary/affiliate’s treatment of
control group and prohibited basis group applicants by
adapting the “benchmark” and “overlap” technique discussed
in Part III, Section C of these procedures. For purposes of
this Steering Analysis, that technique should be conducted as
follows:
a. For each focal point to be analyzed, select a sample of
prohibited basis group applicants who received “less
favorable” treatment (e.g., referral to a finance
company or a subprime mortgage subsidiary or
counteroffers of less favorable product alternatives).
NOTE: In selecting the sample, follow the guidance of
Fair Lending Sample Size Tables, Table B in the
Appendix and select “marginal applicants” as
instructed in Part III, Section C, above.
b. Prepare a spread sheet for the sample which contains
data entry categories for those underwriting and/or
referral criteria that the institution identified in Step 1.b
as used in reaching underwriting and referral decisions
between the pairs of products.
c. Review the “less favorably” treated prohibited basis
group sample and rank this sample from least qualified
to most qualified.
d. From the sample, identify the best qualified prohibited
basis group applicant, based on the criteria identified
for the control group, above. This applicant will be
the “benchmark” applicant. Rank order the remaining
applicants from best to least qualified.
e. Select a sample of control group applicants. Identify
those who were treated “more favorably” with respect to
the same product-alternative product pair as the
prohibited basis group. (Again refer to the Sample Size
Table B and marginal applicant processes noted above
in selecting the sample.)
f. Compare the qualifications of the benchmark applicant
with those of the control group applicants, beginning
with the least qualified member of that sample. Any
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.18 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
control group applicant who appears less qualified than
the benchmark applicant should be identified on the
spreadsheet as a “control group overlap.”
g. Compare all control group overlaps with other, less
qualified prohibited basis group applicants to
determine whether additional overlaps exist
h. Document all overlaps as possible disparities in treatment.
Discuss all overlaps and related findings (e.g., any
differences between stated and actual underwriting and/or
referral criteria) with management, documenting all such
conversations.
Step 7. Examiners should consult with their agency’s
supervisory staff if they see a need to contact control group
or prohibited basis group applicants to substantiate the
steering analysis.
F. Transactional Underwriting Analysis — Commercial
Loans.
Overview: Unlike consumer credit, where loan products and
prices are generally homogenous and underwriting involves
the evaluation of a limited number of credit variables,
commercial loans are generally unique and underwriting
methods and loan pricing may vary depending on a large
number of credit variables. The additional credit analysis
that is involved in underwriting commercial credit products
will entail additional complexity in the sampling and
discrimination analysis process. Although ECOA prohibits
discrimination in all commercial credit activities of a covered
institution, the agencies recognize that small businesses (sole
proprietorships, partnerships, and small, closely-held
corporations) may have less experience in borrowing. Small
businesses may have fewer borrowing options, which may
make them more vulnerable to discrimination. Therefore, in
implementing these procedures, examinations should
generally be focused on small business credit (commercial
applicants that had gross revenues of $1,000,000 or less in
the preceding fiscal year), absent some evidence that a focus
on other commercial products would be more appropriate.
Step 1. Understand Commercial Loan Policies
For the commercial product line selected for analysis, the
examiner should first review credit policy guidelines and
interview appropriate commercial loan managers and officers
to obtain written and articulated standards used by the
institution in evaluating commercial loan applications.
NOTE: Examiners should consult their own agencies for
guidance on when a comparative analysis or statistical
analysis is appropriate, and follow their agencies procedures
for conducting such a review/analysis.
Step 2. Conduct Comparative File Review
a. Select all (or a maximum of ten) denied applications that
were acted on during the three month period prior to the
examination. To the extent feasible, include denied
applications from businesses that are (i) located in
minority and/or integrated geographies or (ii) appear to be
owned by women or minority group members, based on
the names of the principals shown on applications or
related documents. (In the case of institutions that do a
significant volume of commercial lending, consider
reviewing more than ten applications.)
b. For each of the denied commercial applications selected,
record specific information from loan files and through
interviews with the appropriate loan officer(s), about the
principal owners, the purpose of the loan, and the specific,
pertinent financial information about the commercial
enterprise (including type of business — retail,
manufacturing, service, etc.), that was used by the
institution to evaluate the credit request. Maintenance or
use of data that identifies prohibited basis characteristics
of those involved with the business (either in approved or
denied loan applications) should be evaluated as a
potential violation of Regulation B.
c. Select ten approved loans that appear to be similar with
regard to business type, purpose of loan, loan amount,
loan terms, and type of collateral, as the denied loans
sampled. For example, if the denied loan sample
includes applications for lines of credit to cover
inventory purchases for retail businesses, the examiner
should select approved applications for lines of credit
from retail businesses.
d. For each approved commercial loan application
selected, obtain and record information parallel to that
obtained for denied applications.
e. The examiner should first compare the credit criteria
considered in the credit process for each of the
approved and denied applications to established
underwriting standards, rather than comparing files
directly.
f. The examiner should identify any deviations from
credit standards for both approved and denied credit
requests, and differences in loan terms granted for
approved credit requests.
g. The examiner should discuss each instance where
deviations from credit standards and terms were noted,
but were not explained in the file, with the commercial
credit underwriter. Each discussion should be
documented.
Step 3. Conduct Targeted Sampling
a. If deviations from credit standards or pricing are not
sufficiently explained by other factors either
documented in the credit file or the commercial
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.19
underwriter was not able to provide a reasonable
explanation, the examiner should determine if
deviations were detrimental to any protected classes of
applicants.
b. The examiner should consider employing the same
techniques for determining race and gender
characteristics of commercial applicants as those
outlined in the consumer loan sampling procedures.
c. If it is determined that there are members of one or more
prohibited basis groups among commercial credit
requests that were not underwritten according to
established standards or received less favorable terms,
the examiner should select additional commercial loans,
where applicants are members of the same prohibited
basis group and select similarly situated control group
credit requests in order to determine whether there is a
pattern or practice of discrimination. These additional
files should be selected based on the specific applicant
circumstance(s) that appeared to have been viewed
differently by lending personnel on a prohibited basis.
d. If there are not enough similarly situated applicants for
comparison in the original sample period to draw a
reasonable conclusion, the examiner should expand the
sample period. The expanded sample period should
generally not go beyond the date of the prior examination.
Sampling Guidelines
a. Generally, the task of selecting an appropriate expanded
sample of prohibited basis and control group applications
for commercial loans will require examiner judgment.
The examiner should select a sample that is large enough
to be able to draw a reasonable conclusion.
b. The examiner should first select from the applications that
were acted on during the initial sample period, but were
not included in the initial sample, and select applications
from prior time periods as necessary.
c. The expanded sample should include both approved and
denied, prohibited basis and control group applications,
where similar credit was requested by similar enterprises
for similar purposes.
G. Analysis of Potential Discriminatory “Redlining”
Overview: For purposes of this analysis, traditional “redlining”
is a form of illegal disparate treatment in which an institution
provides unequal access to credit, or unequal terms of credit,
because of the race, color, national origin, or other prohibited
characteristic(s) of the residents of the area in which the credit
seeker resides or will reside or in which the residential
property to be mortgaged is located. Redlining may also
include “reverse redlining,” the practice of targeting certain
borrowers or areas with less advantageous products or services
based on prohibited characteristics.
The redlining analysis may be applied to determine whether,
on a prohibited basis:
• an institution fails or refuses to extend credit in certain
areas;
• an institution targets certain borrowers or certain areas
with less advantageous products:
• an institution makes loans in such an area but at a
restricted level or upon less-favorable terms or conditions
as compared to contrasting areas; or
• an institution omits or excludes such an area from efforts
to market residential loans or solicit customers for
residential credit.
This guidance focuses on possible discrimination based on
race or national origin. The same analysis could be adapted
to evaluate relative access to credit for areas of geographical
concentration on other prohibited bases — for example,
age.
NOTE: It is true that neither the Equal Credit Opportunity Act
(ECOA) nor the Fair Housing Act (FHAct) specifically uses
the term “redlining.” However, federal courts as well as
agencies that have enforcement responsibilities for the FHAct,
have interpreted it as prohibiting institutions from having
different marketing or lending practices for certain
geographic areas, compared to others, where the purpose or
effect of such differences would be to discriminate on a
prohibited basis. Similarly, the ECOA would prohibit treating
applicants for credit differently on the basis of differences in
the racial or ethnic composition of their respective
neighborhoods.
Like other forms of disparate treatment, redlining can be
proven by overt or comparative evidence. If any written or
oral policy or statement of the institution (see risk factors R6-
10 in Part I, above) suggests that the institution links the racial
or national origin character of an area with any aspect of
access to or terms of credit, the examiners should refer to the
guidance in Section B of this Part III, on documenting and
evaluating overt evidence of discrimination.
Overt evidence includes not only explicit statements, but
also any geographical terms used by the institution that
would, to a reasonable person familiar with the community
in question, connote a specific racial or national origin
character. For example, if the principal information
conveyed by the phrase “north of 110th Street” is that the
indicated area is principally occupied by Hispanics, then a
policy of not making credit available “north of 110th Street”
is overt evidence of potential redlining on the basis of
national origin.
Overt evidence is relatively uncommon. Consequently, the
redlining analysis usually will focus on comparative
evidence (similar to analyses of possible disparate treatment
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.20 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
of individual customers) in which the institution’s treatment
of areas with contrasting racial or national origin characters
is compared.
When the scoping process (including consultation within
an agency as called for by agency procedures) indicates
that a redlining analysis should be initiated, examiners
should complete the following steps of comparative
analysis:
1. Identify and delineate any areas within the institution’s
CRA assessment area and reasonably expected market
area for residential products that have a racial or
national origin character;
2. Determine whether any minority area identified in Step 1
appears to be excluded, under-served, selectively
excluded from marketing efforts, or otherwise lessfavorably treated in any way by the institution;
3. Identify and delineate any areas within the institution’s
CRA assessment area and reasonably expected market
area for residential products that are non-minority in
character and that the institution appears to treat more
favorably;
4. Identify the location of any minority areas located just
outside the institution’s CRA assessment area and market
area for residential products, such that the institution may
be purposely avoiding such areas;
5. Obtain the institution’s explanation for the apparent
difference in treatment between the areas and evaluate
whether it is credible and reasonable; and
6. Obtain and evaluate other information that may support or
contradict interpreting identified disparities to be the result
of intentional illegal discrimination.
These steps are discussed in detail below.
Using Information Obtained During Scoping
Although the six tasks listed are presented below as
examination steps in the order given above, examiners should
recognize that a different order may be preferable in any given
examination. For example, the institution’s explanation (Step
5) for one of the policies or patterns in question may already
be documented in the CRA materials reviewed (Step 1) and
the CRA examiners may already have verified it, which may
be sufficient for purposes of the redlining analysis.
As another example, as part of the scoping process, the
examiners may have reviewed an analysis of the geographic
distribution of the institution’s loan originations with respect
to the racial and national origin composition of census tracts
within its CRA assessment or residential market area. Such
analysis might have documented the existence of significant
discrepancies between areas, by degree of minority
concentration, in loans originated (risk factor R1),
approval/denial rates (risk factor R2), and/or rates of denials
because of insufficient collateral (risk factor R3). In such a
situation in which the scoping process has produced a reliable
factual record, the examiners could begin with Step 5
(obtaining an explanation) of the redlining analysis below.
In contrast, when the scoping process only yields partial or
questionable information, or when the risk factors on which
the redlining analysis is based on complaints or allegations
against the institution, Steps 1-4 must be addressed.
Comparative analysis for redlining
Step 1. Identify and delineate any areas within the
institution’s CRA assessment area and reasonably expected
market area for residential products that are of a racial or
national origin minority character.
NOTE: The CRA assessment area can be a convenient unit
for redlining analysis because information about it typically
already is in hand. However, the CRA assessment area may
be too limited. The redlining analysis focuses on the
institution’s decisions about how much access to credit to
provide to different geographical areas. The areas for which
those decisions can best be compared are areas where the
institution actually marketed and provided credit and where
it could reasonably be expected to have marketed and
provided credit. Some of those areas might be beyond or
otherwise different from the CRA assessment area.
If there are no areas identifiable for their racial or national
origin minority character within the institution’s CRA
assessment area or reasonably expected market area for
residential products, a redlining analysis is not appropriate.
(If there is a substantial but dispersed minority population,
potential disparate treatment can be evaluated by a routine
comparative file review of applicants.)
This step may have been substantially completed during
scoping, but unresolved matters may remain. (For
example, several community spokespersons may allege that
the institution is redlining, but disagree in defining the
area). The examiners should:
a. Describe as precisely as possible why a specific area is
recognized in the community (perceptions of residents,
etc.) and/or is objectively identifiable (based on census
or other data) as having a particular racial or national
origin minority character.
• The most obvious identifier is the predominant race
or national origin of the residents of the area.
Examiners should document the percentages of
racial or national origin minorities residing within
the census tracts that make up the area. Analyzing
racial and national origin concentrations in quartiles
(such as 0 to <=25%, >25% to < = 50%, >50% to <=
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.21
75%, and >75%) or based on majority concentration
(0 to <=50%, and >50%) may be helpful. However,
examiners should bear in mind that it is illegal for
the institution to consider a prohibited factor in any
way. For example, an area or neighborhood may
only have a minority population of 20%, but if the
area’s concentration appears related to lending
practices, it would be appropriate to use that area’s
level of concentration in the analysis. Contacts with
community groups can be helpful to learn whether
there are such subtle features of racial or ethnic
character within a particular neighborhood.
• Geographical groupings that are convenient for CRA
may obscure racial patterns. For example, an
underserved, low-income, predominantly minority
neighborhood that lies within a larger low-income
area that primarily consisted of non-minority
neighborhoods may seem adequately served when
the entire low-income area is analyzed as a unit.
However, a racial pattern of underservice to minority
areas might be revealed if the low-income minority
neighborhood shared a border with an underserved,
middle-income, minority area and those two
minority areas were grouped together for purposes of
analysis.
b. Describe how the racial or national origin character
changes across the suspected redlining area’s
various boundaries.
c. Document or estimate the demand for credit, within the
minority area. This may include the applicable
demographics of the area, including the percentage of
homeowners, the median house value, median family
income, or the number of small businesses, etc. Review
the institution’s non-originated loan applications from
the suspected redlined areas. If available, review
aggregate institution data for loans originated and
applications received from the suspected redlined areas.
Community contacts may also be helpful in determining
the demand for such credit. If the minority area does not
have a significant amount of demand for such credit, the
area is not appropriate for a redlining analysis.
Step 2. Determine whether any minority area identified in
Step 1 is excluded, under-served, selectively excluded from
marketing efforts, or otherwise less-favorably treated in
any way by the institution.
The examiners should begin with the risk factors identified
during the scoping process. The unfavorable treatment may
have been substantially documented during scoping and needs
only to be finished in this step. If not, this step will verify and
measure the extent to which HMDA data show the minority
areas identified in Step 1 to be underserved and/or how the
institution’s explicit policies treat them less favorably.
a. Review prior CRA lending test analyses to learn whether
they have identified any excluded or otherwise underserved areas or other significant geographical disparities in
the institution’s lending. Determine whether any of those
are the minority areas identified in Step 1.
b. Learn from the institution itself whether, as a matter of
policy, it treats any separate or distinct geographical areas
within its marketing or service area differently from other
areas. This may have been done completely or partially
during scoping analysis related to risk factors R5-R9.
The differences in treatment can be in marketing,
products offered, branch operations (including the
services provided and the hours of operation), appraisal
practices, application processing, approval requirements,
pricing, loan conditions, evaluation of collateral, or any
other policy or practice materially related to access to
credit. Determine whether any of those less-favored areas
are the minority areas identified in Step 1.
c. Obtain from the institution: (i) its reasons for such
differences in policy, (ii) how the differences are
implemented, and (iii) any specific conditions that must
exist in an area for it to receive the particular treatment
(more favorable or less favorable) that the institution has
indicated.
Step 3. Identify and delineate any areas within the
institution’s CRA assessment area and reasonably
expected market area for residential products that are
non-minority in character and that the institution appears
to treat more favorably.
To the extent not already completed during scoping:
a. Document the percentages of control group and of
racial or national origin minorities residing within the
census tract(s) that comprise(s) the non-minority area.
b. Document the nature of the housing stock in the
area.
c. Describe, to the extent known, how the institution’s
practices, policies, or its rate of lending change
from less-to more-favorable as one leaves the
minority area at its various boundaries. (Examiners
should be particularly attentive to instances in
which the boundaries between favored and
disfavored areas deviate from boundaries the
institution would reasonably be expected to follow,
such as political boundaries or transportation
barriers.)
d. Examiners should particularly consider whether, within
a large area that is composed predominantly of racial or
national origin minority households, there are enclaves
that are predominantly non-minority or whether, along
the area’s borders, there are irregularities where the
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.22 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
non- minority group is predominant. As part of the
overall comparison, examiners should determine
whether credit access within those small non-minority
areas differs from credit access in the larger minority
area.
Step 4. Identify the location of any minority areas located
just outside the institution’s CRA assessment area and
market area for residential products, such that the
institution may be purposely avoiding such areas.
Review the analysis from prior CRA examinations of
whether the assessment area appears to have been influenced
by prohibited factors. If there are minority areas that the
institution excluded from the assessment area improperly,
consider whether they ought to be included in the redlining
analysis. Analyze the institution’s reasonably expected
market area in the same manner.
Step 5. Obtain the institution’s explanation for the
apparent difference in treatment between the areas and
evaluate whether it is credible and reasonable.
This step completes the comparative analysis by soliciting
from the institution any additional information not yet
considered by the examiners that might show that there is a
nondiscriminatory explanation for the apparent disparate
treatment based on race or ethnicity.
For each matter that requires explanation, provide the
institution full information about what differences appear to
exist in how it treats minority and non-minority areas, and how
the examiners reached their preliminary conclusions at this
stage of the analysis.
a. Evaluate whether the conditionsidentified by the
institution in Step 2 as justifying more favorable
treatment pursuant to institutional policy existed
in minority neighborhoods that did not receive
the favorable treatment called for by institutional
policy. If there are minority areas for which
those conditions existed, ask the institution to
explain why the areas were treated differently
despite the similar conditions.
b. Evaluate whether the conditions identified by the
institution in Step 2 as justifying less favorable treatment
pursuant to institutional policy existed in non-minority
neighborhoods that received favorable treatment
nevertheless. If there are non-minority areas for which
those conditions existed, ask the institution to explain
why those areas were treated differently, despite the
similar conditions.
c. Obtain explanations from the institution for any apparent
differences in treatment observed by the examiners but
not called for by the institution’s policies:
• If the institution’s explanation cites any specific
conditions in the non-minority area(s) to justify more
favorable treatment, determine whether the minority
area(s) identified in Step 1 satisfied those conditions.
If there are minority areas for which those conditions
existed, ask the institution to explain why the areas
were treated differently despite the similar conditions.
• If the institution’s explanation cites any specific
conditions in the minority area(s) to justify less
favorable treatment, determine whether the nonminority area(s) had those conditions. If there are
non-minority areas for which those conditions existed,
ask the institution to explain why those areas were
treated differently, despite the similar conditions.
d. Evaluate the institution’s responses by applying
appropriate principles selected from the Appendix on
Evaluating Responses to Evidence of Disparate
Treatment.
Step 6. Obtain and evaluate specific types of other
information that may support or contradict a finding of
redlining.
As a legal matter, discriminatory intent can be inferred
simply from the lack of a legitimate explanation for clearly
less- favorable treatment of racial or national origin
minorities. Nevertheless, if the institution’s explanations do
not adequately account for a documented difference in
treatment, the examiners should consider additional
information that might support or contradict the
interpretation that the difference in treatment constituted
redlining.
a. Comparative file review. If there was a comparative
file review conducted in conjunction with the
redlining examination, review the results; or, if it is
necessary and feasible to do so to clarify what appears
to be discriminatory redlining, compare denied
applications from within the suspected redlining area
to approved applications from the contrasting area.
• Learn whether there were any denials of
fully qualified applicants from the
suspected redlining area. If so, that may
support the view that the institution was
avoiding doing business in the area.
• Learn whether the file review identified instances of
illegal disparate treatment against applicants of the
same race or national origin as the suspected
redlining area. If so, that may support the view that
the institution was avoiding doing business with
applicants of that group, such as the residents of the
suspected redlining area. Learn whether any such
identified victims applied for transactions in the
suspected redlining area.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.23
• If there are instances of either of the above, identify
denied non-minority residents, if any, of the
suspected redlining area and review their
application files to learn whether they appear to
have been treated in an irregular or less favorable
way. If so, that may support the view that the
character of the area rather than of the applicants
themselves appears to have influenced the credit
decisions.
• Review withdrawn and incomplete applications for
the suspected redlining area, if those can readily be
identified from the HMDA-LAR, and learn whether
there are reliable indications that the institution
discouraged those applicants from applying. If so,
that may support the view that the institution was
avoiding conducting business in the area and may
constitute evidence of a violation of Section
1002.4(b) of Regulation B. Conversely, if the
comparisons of individual transactions show that
the institution treated minority and non-minority
applicants within and outside the suspected
redlining area similarly, that tends to contradict the
conclusion that the institution avoided the areas
because it had minority residents.
b. Interviews of third parties. The perspectives of third
parties will have been taken into account to some degree
through the review of available materials during scoping.
Later in the examination, in appropriate circumstances,
information from third parties may help determine
whether the institution’s apparent differences in treatment
of minority and non-minority areas constitute redlining.
• Identify persons (such as housing or credit counselors,
home improvement contractors, or real estate and
mortgage brokers) who may have extensive
experience dealing with credit applicants from the
suspected redlined area.
• After obtaining appropriate authorization and
guidance from your agency, interview those persons
to learn of their first-hand experiences related to:
o oral statements or written indications by an
institution’s representatives that loan applications
from a suspected redlined area were discouraged;
o whether the institution treated applicants from
the suspected redlining area as called for in its
own procedures (as the examiners understand
them) and/or whether it treated them similarly to
applicants from non-minority areas (as the
examiners are familiar with those transactions);
o any unusual delays or irregularities in loan
processing for transactions in the suspected
redlining area; and
o differences in the institution’s pricing, loan
conditions, property valuation practices, etc., in
the suspected redlining area compared to
contrasting areas.
Also, learn from the third parties the names of any
consumers they described as having experienced the
questionable behavior recounted by the third party, and
consider contacting those consumers.
If third parties witnessed specific conduct by the institution
that indicates the institution wanted to avoid business from
the area or prohibited basis group in question, this would
tend to support interpreting the difference in treatment as
intended. Conversely, if third parties report proper treatment
or positive actions toward such area or prohibited basis
group, this would tend to contradict the view that the
institution intended to discriminate.
c. Marketing. A clear exclusion of the suspected redlining
area from the institution’s marketing of residential loan
products supports the view that the institution did not want
to do business in the area. Marketing decisions are
affirmative acts to include or exclude areas. Disparities in
marketing between two areas may reveal that the
institution prefers one to the other. If sufficiently stark
and supported by other evidence, a difference in
marketing to racially different areas could itself be treated
as a redlining violation of the Fair Housing Act. Even
below that level of difference, marketing patterns can
support or contradict the view that disparities in lending
practices were intentional.
• Review materials that show how the institution has
marketed in the suspected redlined area and in nonminority areas. Begin with available CRA materials
and discuss the issues with CRA examiners, then
review other materials as appropriate. The materials
may include, for example, the institution’s guidance
for the geographical distribution of pre-approved
solicitations for credit cards or home equity lines of
credit, advertisements in local media or business or
telephone directories, business development calls to
real estate brokers, and calls by telemarketers.
e. Peer performance. Market share analysis and other
comparisons to competitors are insufficient by
themselves to prove that an institution engaged in illegal
redlining. By the same token, an institution cannot
justify its own failure to market or lend in an area by
citing other institutions’ failures to lend or market there.
However, an institution’s inactivity in an underserved
area where its acknowledged competitors are active
would tend to support the interpretation that it intends to
avoid doing business in the area. Conversely, if it is as
active as other institutions that would suggest that it 
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.24 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
intends to compete for, rather than avoid, business in the
area.
• Develop a list of the institution’s competitors.
• Learn the level of lending in the suspected
redlining area by competitors. Check any public
evaluations of similarly situated competitors
obtained by the CRA examiners as part of
evaluating the performance context or obtain such
evaluations independently.
f. Institution’s record. Request from the institution
information about its overall record of serving or
attempting to serve the racial or national origin
minority group with which the suspected redlining area
is identified. The record may reveal intent to serve
that group that tends to contradict the view that the
institution intends to discriminate against the group.
NOTE: For any information that supports interpreting
the situation as illegal discrimination, obtain and
evaluate an explanation from the institution as called
for in Part IV. If the institution’s explanation is that the
disparate results are the consequence of a specific,
neutral policy or practice that the institution applies
broadly, such as not making loans on homes below a
certain value, review the guidance in the Special
Analyses section of the Appendix under
Disproportionate Adverse Impact Violations and consult
agency managers.
H. Analysis of Potential Discriminatory Marketing
Practices.
When scoping identifies significant risk factors (M1-M7)
related to marketing, examiners should consult their agency’s
supervisory staff and experts about a possible marketing
discrimination analysis. If the supervisory staff agrees to
proceed, the examiners should collect information as follows:
Step 1. Identify the institution’s marketing initiatives.
a. Pre-approved solicitations
• Determine whether the institution sends out preapproved solicitations:
° For home purchase loans,
° For home improvement loans, or
° For refinance loans.
• Determine how the institution selects recipients for
such solicitations
° Learn from the institution its criteria for such
selections.
° Review any guidance or other information the
institution provided credit reporting companies or
other companies that supply such lists.
b. Media Usage
• Determine in which newspapers and broadcast media
the institution advertises.
° Identify any racial or national origin identity
associated with those media.
° Determine whether those media focus on
geographical communities of a particular racial or
national origin character.
• Learn the institution’s strategies for geographic and
demographic distribution of advertisements.
• Obtain and review copies of the institution’s printed
advertising and promotional materials.
• Determine what criteria the institution communicates
to media about what is an attractive customer or an
attractive area to cultivate business.
• Determine whether advertising and marketing are the
same to racial and national origin minority areas as
compared to non-minority areas.
c. Self-produced promotional materials
• Learn how the institution distributes its own
promotional materials, both methods and geographical
distribution.
• Learn what the institution regards as the target
audience(s) for those materials.
d. Realtors, brokers, contractors, and other intermediaries
• Determine whether the institution solicits business
from specific realtors, brokers, home improvement
contractors, and other conduits.
o Learn how the institution decides which
intermediaries it will solicit.
o Identify the parties contacted and determine the
distribution between minority and non-minority
areas.
o Obtain and review the types of information the
institution distributes to intermediaries.
o Determine how often the institution contacts
intermediaries.
o Determine what criteria the institution
communicates to intermediaries about the type
of customers it seeks or the nature of the
geographic areas in which it wishes to do
business.
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021 IV – 1.25
e. Telemarketers or predictive dialer programs
• Learn how the institution identifies which consumers
to contact, and whether the institution sets any
parameters on how the list of consumers is compiled.
Step 2. Determine whether the institution’s activities show a
significantly lower level of marketing effort toward minority
areas or toward media or intermediaries that tend to reach
minority areas.
Step 3. If there is any such disparity, document the
institution’s explanation for it.
For additional guidance, refer to Part C of the Special Analyses
section in the Appendix.
I. Credit Scoring.
If the scoping process results in the selection of a focal point
that includes a credit or mortgage scored loan product, refer
to the Considering Automated Underwriting and Credit
Scoring section of the Appendix.
If the institution utilizes a credit scoring program which
scores age for any loan product selected for review in the
scoping stage, either as the sole underwriting determinant or
only as a guide to making loan decisions, refer to Part E of
the Considering Automated Underwriting and Credit
Scoring section of the Appendix.
J. Disparate Impact Issues.
These procedures have thus far focused primarily on
examining comparative evidence for possible unlawful
disparate treatment. Disparate impact has been described
briefly in the Introduction. Whenever an examiner
believes that a particular policy or practice of an institution
appears to have a disparate impact on a prohibited basis,
the examiner should refer to Part A of the Special Analyses
section of the Appendix or consult with agency supervisory
staff for further guidance.
Part IV — Obtaining and Evaluating Responses
From the Institution and Concluding the
Examination
Step 1. Present to the institution’s management for
explanation:
a. Any overt evidence of disparate treatment on a prohibited
basis.
b. All instances of apparent disparate treatment (e.g.,
overlaps) in either the underwriting of loans or in loan
prices, terms, or conditions.
c. All instances of apparent disparate treatment in the form
of discriminatory steering, redlining, or marketing
policies or practices.
d. All instances where a denied prohibited basis applicant
was not afforded the same level of assistance or the same
benefit of discretion as an approved control group
applicant who was no better qualified with regard to the
reason for denial.
e. All instances where a prohibited basis applicant received
conspicuously less favorable treatment by the institution
than was customary from the institution or was required
by the institution’s policy.
f. Any statistically significant average difference in either
the frequency or amount of pricing disparities between
control group and prohibited basis group applicants.
g. Any evidence of neutral policies, procedures or practices
that appear to have a disparate impact or effect on a
prohibited basis.
Explain that unless there are legitimate, nondiscriminatory
explanations (or in the case of disparate impact, a compelling
business justification) for each of the preliminary findings of
discrimination identified in this Part, the agency could
conclude that the institution is in violation of the applicable
fair lending laws.
Step 2. Document all responses that have been provided
by the institution, not just its “best” or “final” response.
Document each discussion with dates, names, titles,
questions, responses, any information that supports or
undercuts the institution’s credibility, and any other
information that bears on the issues raised in the
discussion(s).
Step 3. Evaluate whether the responses are consistent with
previous statements, information obtained from file
review, documents, reasonable banking practices, and
other sources, and satisfy common-sense standards of logic
and credibility.
a. Do not speculate or assume that the institution’s
decision- maker had specific intentions or
considerations in mind when he or she took the actions
being evaluated. Do not, for example, conclude that
because you have noticed a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for a denial (such as an
applicant’s credit weakness), that no discrimination
occurred unless it is clear that, at the time of the denial,
the institution actually based the denial on that reason.
b. Perform follow-up file reviews and comparative
analyses, as necessary, to determine the accuracy and
credibility of the institution’s explanations.
c. Refer to Evaluating Responses to Evidence of
Disparate Treatment in the Appendix for guidance as
to common types of responses.
d. Refer to the Disproportionate Adverse Impact
IV. Fair Lending — Fair Lending Laws and Regulations
IV – 1.26 FDIC Consumer Compliance Examination Manual – March 2021
Violations portion of the Special Analyses section of
the Appendix for guidance on evaluating the
institution’s responses to apparent disparate impact.
Step 4. If, after completing Steps 1–3 above, you conclude
that the institution has failed to adequately demonstrate
that one or more apparent violations had a legitimate
nondiscriminatory basis or were otherwise lawful, prepare
a documented list or discussion of violations, or a draft
examination report, as prescribed by agency directives.
Step 5. Consult with agency supervisory staff regarding
whether (a) any violations should be referred to the
Departments of Justice or Housing and Urban
Development and (b) enforcement action should be
undertaken by your agency.
